# Anony Msg [In-Development]



## Overview

My first ever Next.js Full-Stack production-grade app which allows users to send a message (or a feedback) to another user anonymously, i.e without revealing their identity.

Thanks a lot to my mentor [Sir. Hitesh Choudhary](https://github.com/hiteshchoudhary) for teaching the "industry-standard" way of building modern production-grade full-stack applications using Next.js, like **AnonyMsg** that too for *Free* in such an amazing, efficient, fun & super-commendable way.

If you wanna learn not only Next.js in a *sweet and beautiful* way, but also the *industry-standard* way to build production-grade apps using it, then don't forget to check out [His course](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLu71SKxNbfoBAaWGtn9GA2PTw0HO0tXzq&si=MDXDrThRp7V2SonC) on His official [Chai aur Code](https://www.youtube.com/@chaiaurcode) YT Channel. Yup, that's exactly from where I've learnt & upskilled myself in Software Development Engineering! 😉😌🫡🌟



## Learnings

Here are my valuable learnings throughout my development journey of **AnonyMsg**:

1. When creating a Mongoose Schema, then first we need to define the structure of each and every document of that collection for which we're defining the schema, and that's done by using `interface` which extends `Document` class of `mongoose`. For eg: `interface Message extends Document`. You can check out file `src/model/User.ts` for bette understanding. Also, it's a convention (good-practice) to use the name of Schema/Model as the interface name, so that it become easily understandable that structure is defined for that specfic collection's documents.

2. In TypeScript, the datatypes we define (either using `type` or `interface`) are in lowercase, like `string`, and `number`, whereas in Mongoose Schema, the types are in capital-case, like `String`, and `Number`.

3. In a traditional Node.js app, the server starts once, so models are created only once. In Next.js, the backend code runs repeatedly due to "hot-reloading" in development or "serverless functions" in production. Because Mongoose saves previously created models in the background, trying to recreate them will cause your app to crash with an error. To prevent this, we check if the model already exists before creating it: `( mongoose.models.User as mongoose.Model<User> ) || ( mongoose.model<User>("User", UserSchema) )`. In the 1st part of this code `mongoose.models.User` is compulsory, but because we're using TS, then we need to specify that the type/structure of the model we'll get should be of `User` type. For better understanding of code you can check out the actual implementation in the 2nd-last line of `src/model/User.ts`.

4. `Hot-reloading` (happens in development) which is one of the functionalities of Next.js, which means that when the file changed and saved, then Next.js just updates that specific piece of code and the changes are reflected instantly (almost in real-time), instead of restarting the entire server. Whereas, `Serverless Functions`, doesn't mean that there aren't any servers, rather it means we don't need to manage a permanent server that runs 24 hours a day. There is also a special type of serverless functions called `Edge Functions` which uses *Edge Networking* in which our backend code is broken down into small individual functions and copied to hundreds of mini-servers globally, so when a user sends a request on our website, then a mini-server, which is physically closest to the client (*Edge*), instantly wakes-up, runs that specific function (in *Edge Runtime*), respond the client, and then goes back to sleep (for saving resources). In short, "Edge Networking" is the harware cuz it provides the physical network of computers, the "Edge" is the physical location of the mini-server closest to the client, and the "Edge Runtime" is the software running the backend code in that mini-server at that location.

5. Using the [Zod](https://www.npmjs.com/package/zod) library for schema validation of incoming data (like form submissions, user registrations, and search filters) to ensure only correct data is passed to Mongoose to be saved in the DB. </br> While Mongoose handles validation right before performing CRUD operations with MongoDB, Zod provides a much easier way to validate data structures across the entire application. Beyond just checking client data received by the server, Zod is also used to validate:  

    * Client-Side Inputs: Data typed by the user in web forms before submission.
    * Third-Party APIs: Data received from external servers during API calls.
    * Environment Variables: Configuration files and secret keys upon server startup.

    Basically, Zod acts as a security guard for the application, strictly validating any data coming in from the outside world before the code actually processes it.

6. Learnt to connect with MongoDB in Next.js using Mongoose, which is a bit different than traditional backend applications, 'cause Next.js uses "Edge Functions" (a special type of Serverless Functions) in which the server isn't running 24*7 constantly, rather wakes-up for handling client-request then goes back to sleep again, due to which connection with database isn't maintained constantly, so if we write traditional backend code to freshly connect with DB upon every server-startup then obviously we're bound to face performance and reliability issues. To prevent this, we just add one additional line of code in the `dbConnection()` function to check whether the connection with DB is already established or not, by using the property in the connection response from the MongoDB, i.e `dbConnectionResponse.connections[0].readyState` (which consists of values: 0: disconnected, 1: connected, and more), if it isn't, then we'll be initiating a new fresh connection. For reference, you can checkout [src/lib/dbConnect.ts](https://github.com/VinayNoogler000/Anony-Msg/blob/9323ab7ac163c6ffa72215a385bbe97ce2083057/src/lib/dbConnect.ts) file. FYI, the Edge Functions in Next.js refers to an execution environment that runs server-side code in the server physically closest to the user, typically called the "edge" of a global network of mini-servers (the Points-of-Presence or PoPs of a CDN).

7. Using [React-Email](https://react.email/) to create Email templates as react-components, especially to send "Verification Code" or OTP to the user's email for verification.

8. Using [Resend](https://resend.com/)(one of the most popular library and top-choice library among Devs) for sending Emails to the users, especially for verification of users' emails in **AnonyMsg** platform.

9. Whenever we fetch documents from MongoDB by using Mongoose methods like `find()` or `findOne()`, then we should be using `lean()` method on top of them (as method chanining) if we just want to read the data and don't requrire Mongoose methods (like `save()`, `populate()`, and `isModified()`) in the fetched documents, 'cause this entirley skips the "hydration" process (adding Mongoose functionalities to the raw JSON document returned by the DB), by returning just the plain JS object, saving resources and increasing performance by 4x times. But, if we want to use the fetched documents as a completely functional Mongoose document, then we should be avoiding the `lean()` method as Mongoose automatically "Hydrates" the raw JSON data returned by the DB. Also should be specifing the datatype of the variable that will be storing the fetched document as `HydratedDocument<Custom-Type> | null` to prevent TypeScript error, and `null` is mentioned in the type, 'cause we're not going to always get a document from MongoDB which matches the filter. For reference, you can checkout the implementation in `app/api/sign-up/route.ts`.

10. To define routes and handlers in Next.js for handling client-requests, we typically create a folder named `api` inside the `app` directory (industry-standard convention —not mandatory, but highly recommended), and then whichever folders we create inside it will be the actual route names in the URL, and to define and export route-handlers for each routes for different HTTP methods (like `GET`, `POST`, `PUT`, and `DELETE`) we need to create a file named `route.ts` inside each route folder, and the name of the function in the file handling the request for each HTTP method should be the same as the HTTP method, but in upper-case, like `GET`, and `POST`. For example, if we want to create a route `/sign-up` for handling user registration, then inside `app` directory we'll create a folder named `api` (optional, but industry-standard ), then we'll create a another folder named `sign-up` in that folder, in which we'll create a file named `route.ts`, in which route handler functions (controllers or backend logic) for different HTTP methods will be defined and exported. It's mandatory to name the file as `route.ts` for defining routes in Next.js, otherwise Next.js won't be able to recognize that file as a route handler file and the route won't work.  
This is not only the "industry-standard", but the actual and only way of defining routes in Next.js (if using the "App Router" instead of the "Pages Router"), which is also known as "File-based Routing" in Next.js, and it is one of the most amazing features of Next.js which makes the development process so much easier and faster.  
For better understanding, you can check out the actual implementation in `app/api/sign-up/route.ts` file. 

11. Learnt to configure "Next-Auth" (one of the most popular authentication library for Next.js) for handling user authentication in Next.js, which includes both "Sign-In" of users, and also "Session Management" (maintaining the session of the signed-in user). For better understanding, you can check out the actual implementation in `src/app/api/auth/[...nextauth]/options.ts` file. 

12. Learnt to modify/overwrite ES modules, like "next-auth" module in ".d.ts" file by using "declare module" keywords. In which I modified "User" interface of "next-auth" module to add some additional properties from my MongoDB User model, like `isVerified`, `_id`, and `username`, so that the token generated by "next-auth" for the signed-in user will also include these additional properties, which can be used in User's authentication and authorization across the application, decreasing the number of DB queries and increasing the performance of the app. For better understanding, you can check out the actual implementation in `src/types/next-auth.d.ts` file.

13. Creating instance of URL and using `searchParams` property to `get()` values of query parameters from the URL, which is a much easier and cleaner way to get query parameters from the URL instead of using regex or string manipulation. For better understanding, you can check out the actual implementation in `src/app/api/unique-username/route.ts` file.

14. Using `safeParse()` method of Zod to validate the incoming data, which returns an object with `success` property (boolean), and either `data` property (if validation is successful) or `error` property (if validation fails), which is a much cleaner way to handle validation. Also, using `z.treeifyError()` method to convert the Zod's errors (especially from `safeParse()`)  into a more readable and understandable format, which is especially useful for debugging and logging errors. For better understanding, you can check out the actual implementation in `src/app/api/unique-username/route.ts` file.

15. To get Server's Session in Next.js application we can use `getServerSession()` method from "next-auth" library, which is a much easier way to get the session of the signed-in user on the server-side, instead of using cookies or other methods. For better understanding, you can check out the actual implementation in `src/app/api/accept-messages/route.ts` file.

16. In MongoDB's aggregation pipeline, the `$match` stage or operator is used to filter documents based on specified conditions, similar to the `find()` method in Mongoose, then the `$unwind` stage is used to deconstruct an array field from the input documents to output a document for each element of the array, which is useful for working with nested data, then the `$sort` stage is used to sort the documents based on specified fields, similar to the `sort()` method in Mongoose, and finally the `$group` stage is used to group documents by specific fields. For better understanding, you can check out the actual implementation in `src/app/api/get-messages/route.ts` file.

17. Integration of Generative-AI (Google Gemini) in Next.js-based Web Applications (like AnonyMsg) to get friendly and interesting message suggestions to send to other users anonymously, seamlessly using Vercel-AI SDK, which is a much easier and cleaner way to integrate Generative-AI in Next.js applications instead of using REST APIs or other methods. For better understanding, you can check out the actual implementation in `src/app/api/suggest-messages/route.ts` file.

18. Using `React Hook Form` for managing form state and validation in React applications, which is a much easier and cleaner way to handle forms instead of using traditional methods like `useState`. In this, I not only learnt to use `useForm()` hook to initialize the form state, but also `resolver` property to integrate Zod schema validation with React Hook Form, setting default values of form fields using `defaultValues` property, even defining how the form-data will be validated using `mode` propert, and `handleSubmit()` method to handle form submission whose one of the task is to pass form data to submit handler function, then also learnt to use its UI components like `Controller` component to wrap the form input components and connect them with React Hook Form, `FieldGroup`, `FieldSet`, `Field` components to create a form whose fields have high accessibility. Also, learnt that `field.onChange()` is what tells React Hook Form to update the form state, so when modifying the `onChange` event attribute of the form fields, then it's necessary to call `field.onChange()` inside it to ensure that the form state is updated correctly, or else we don't need to use `onChange` event attribute at all, as React Hook Form automatically handles it for us. For better understanding, you can check out the actual implementation in `src/app/(auth)/sign-up/page.tsx` file.

19. In "useHooks-TS" library, `useDebounceValue()` allows us to delay the update of a value/data/state until a specified amount of time has passed since the last change, whereas `useDebounceCallback()` allows us to delay the execution of a function until a specified amount of time has passed since the last invocation. This phenomenon is called "Debouncing" which is especially useful for optimizing performance in scenarios where we don't want redundant operations of funciton execution or state updates to occur too frequently, like in search input fields, API calls, and event handling. For better understanding, you can check out the actual implementation in `src/app/(auth)/sign-up/page.tsx` file.

20. Using Next-Auth's `signIn()` client-side method to sign-in the user, by just passing the "provider-id" (like "credentials", "google", and "github") as the first argument, and the other "options" (like `redirect`, `callbackUrl`, including credentials (`identifier` and `password`) if using "credentials" provider) as a second argument. It's a much easier and cleaner way to sign-in the user instead of using traditional methods like `fetch()` or `axios`. For better understanding, you can check out the actual implementation in `src/app/(auth)/sign-in/page.tsx` file.
